>> Richard Feldman: Okay, and
that brings us to part 6, polymorphism.
>> Speaker 2: So now we're gonna get
into the most advanced forms of function
related things.
>> Richard Feldman: And part 7 is going
to be WebAssembly code generation.
So this part 6 is the culmination
of our type checking journey.
So at the end of this we will have
gone as far as we're going to go with
Hindley-Milner type inference.
And hopefully,
it's been an enjoyable journey.
Let's just start off by talking
about polymorphic functions, and
we'll talk about what that term means
very specifically while we're at it.
We'll talk about arrays, this is a very
classic example of polymorphism,
where you have an array that has
a specific type associated with it.
So you could say, at the type level,
this is an array of strings, or
this is an array of numbers.
And then finally, we're gonna talk about
type annotations as promised earlier on.
At the very end, after we've talked about
all the other type system features we're
just gonna throw type annotations in
there at the end, just as a way of really
emphasizing that, yes, you really can
get complete full type inference.
And really type annotations are strictly
an optional thing that we're just kind of
attacking on at the end.
In case you want to write annotations
to annotate your source code for all
the usual reasons that you might choose to
do that, even though you don't have to.
Okay, so let's start off by talking
about polymorphic functions.
So previously, you may recall,
that we had this increment function
defined to be x return x + 1.
We had this goal of having one
successful unification here,
where we're using inc(42) that should
unify, because this is all about numbers,
and 42 is a number, that should be fine.
This one needs to be a mismatch, because
it's a string, which is a concrete type,
that's not a number.
So now we're going to do something
that's a little bit fancier than that.
So this here is the identity function,
it's one of the most famous functions out
there, it's just basically takes one
argument and returns it [LAUGH].
It's very straightforward function,
but has some surprisingly useful and
also surprisingly interesting properties.
So the identity function is interesting
because the way that this works in terms
of definition, first of all,
ends up getting us to that case
that we talked about earlier,
where we actually are going to have
a null ending up in the types table.
But also, this is a case where this
actually should not end up with 1 success
and 1 mismatch for this,
this should be totally legit.
We should just have 2 successes for
these two types,
even though they're totally
different concrete types.
And in fact, if we don't have 2 successes
here, something has gone very, very wrong
with our type checker because obviously,
the identity function should always work
when you call it with different types,
that's kind of its whole thing.
Now, worth noting,
this is a form of polymorphism.
So polymorphism generally means that you
have your program behaving differently
depending on a type difference.
In other words, this identity function is
essentially doing two different things
depending on what types we pass it.
If I pass it a number, it's returning
a number, if I pass it to get a string,
it's returning a string.
Now, in the language like JavaScript, that
distinction might sound kinda meaningless,
it's, what do you mean it's doing
something different based on the type?
Those are just two different types,
what's the big deal?
When we get to WebAssembly
code generation,
we'll see that that actually
is a relevant difference.
Because strings and numbers,
if you're dealing with bytes in memory,
those are different sizes in memory,
they have a different number of
bytes they take up in memory.
And so, when you're implementing
this at a really low-level,
like we're gonna do in the next section.
When you're, hey, this function returns
8 bytes, versus this function returns 12
bytes, those are different functions,
you have to pick one.
[LAUGH] You can't just say this
returns some bytes, I don't know,
you have to pick an actual number.
And so, from that perspective, this
function has to be polymorphic because
that's what type of low-level
code generation we're doing.
If we're doing an interpreter or something
like that, we could sort of pass along
some runtime type information and
then do the polymorphism at runtime.
Which is why it maybe doesn't feel
like it's polymorphic because a lot of
languages just take care
of that at runtime for you.
So, as a user of the language,
it doesn't feel as if I'm doing something
different based on the types, but
behind the scenes, the runtime interpreter
is having to do something different.
Because fundamentally, if you have two
different types of different sizes,
the CPU really is only gonna
accept [LAUGH] numbers and
instructions that work with one or
the other.
Okay, so, let's bust out our trusty types
table here and our little database,
and basically say, okay,
we're gonna assign 0 to the name here and
1 to the thing after
the equals just like always.
We're gonna go through and assign 2 to
the argument a, 3 to the return type.
And then, once again, we're gonna
recycle this and just say, okay,
yeah, we could just make a thing and
assign it to symlink, but
we're just gonna say cut to the chase,
a is just 2 in both cases.
Okay, here's our initial types database,
everything's null.
Basically, we're gonna start off
building up some unifications here.
So unify(0, 1) that's our classic,
just like we're gonna symlink this thing
to the thing that it's equal to unify(3,
2) is basically because
we have a return here.
So anywhere we have a return,
we're basically saying, okay,
that return type that is getting
returned needs to be the return
type of the function,
those need to be unified.
And that's actually it for identity.
So previously, when we had the return x +
1, we had a whole bunch more unifications
to do here,
because plus brought three of its own.
We had a number literal.
Identity function, really lightweight.
It's basically just these two
unifications, and that's it.
So let's see how these
translate into the database.
So okay, it's unify(0, 1),
we have seen this many times,
this is just a symlink connecting the two.
And then unify(3, 2) again,
just a symlink, and that's it.
So we're done unifying this function,
there is nothing more to unify,
there are no more constraints to apply.
There are no more rules that this function
has to follow, and yet we still have two
glaring nulls sitting here [LAUGH]
in our database for the first time.
So, what implications does this have for
calling the functions?
Well, so this is what it's
gonna look like in the actual,
whether we do it in the side table, or
whether we actually store it in there,
we are going to end up with a function
that has these variables in it.
So, I guess we end up with just one null
in the database after we put that in
there for 1 which is this whole thing,
forget about that one.
But yes, [LAUGH] the a is what's
null here, because this thing has no
constraints on it whatsoever, it's just,
I am an argument, that's my constraint,
[LAUGH] being an argument
is not a type constraint.
Yeah, then also we'll do
a path compression on this.
So the path compression would basically
say, okay, since 2 and 3 are connected,
3 is sub-linked to 2, then basically,
we would follow that and say, okay,
these two are just both 2.
Okay, so, our goal is 2 successes for
each of these.
So now let's get into the calling
the functions part of this.
All right, so to do this we're gonna need
to once again expand our database table.
So all the values are the same, but
we've got a bunch more nulls in here.
I'm gonna assign 0 to identity again
because again, we're just doing the scope
lookup here and saying,
we're gonna reuse the 0 we already have.
We're gonna assign 4 to be the return
type of this whole thing, and
then 5 to be the argument, and same thing
here, 6 to be what it all evaluates to,
and then 7 to be the argument.
Okay, next up, we're gonna unify(4,
2) because basically, we're saying, okay,
4 is the entire thing that this call
to identity is going to resolve to.
And what a returns is, sorry,
what the identity function returns is 2.
So, right at this point, and I'm gonna
give you a very small spoiler that
the approach we're about to
take is not going to work out.
So if you're watching this and
saying, hang on a sec,
that doesn't look like it's
gonna work out, you're right.
It's not gonna work out and then we're
gonna learn what we're gonna do instead.
But for right now, we're just gonna keep
doing the thing we did in the previous
section and then crash and
we'll brick wall.
So, unify(4, 2), basically just
exactly like we did last time, great.
Then unify(5, 2), because okay, well,
that's the argument coming in and
it's a 2 over there as well,
so far so good.
So we've unified this with the return
type just like we did last time and
then this with the argument type.
Great, and then of course,
we need to unify 5 with a number because
it's a number, they're all obviously.
So [LAUGH] we've all done a one
character worth of space here [LAUGH].
Okay, so we'll just go ahead and
process those.
So 4 becomes the symlink to 2, 5 also
becomes the symlink to 2, and then 5 also
becomes the symlink to a Number, and
already there was trouble brewing.
Because now we have our identity function,
and somehow, our identity function now
thinks it only takes numbers, which means
it's no longer the identity function.
And we're about to ran crash into the
brick wall of implications of that as soon
as we start trying to
unify this next one here.
So, again, we're doing 6 and
2 because that's the return type here.
So, this whole thing's return type
should be whatever this is returning.
Then 7 and 2, because the argument
is also coming in there.
And then finally, 7 and string,
because, hey, that's a string literal.
So 6 and 2, great symlink,
7 and 2, great symlink.
And then here's where trouble starts,
we're unifying the number 7,
which is symlink to 2 over
here with a string and kaboom.
Now we're trying to make this be both a
number and a string at the same time, and
we've got a tight mismatch
that we shouldn't have it.
We were trying to aim for 2 successes and
we ended up with 1 success and 1 type
mismatch exactly as we did in the previous
section when we actually wanted that.
Okay, so what were we supposed
to do different here?
Cuz our goal was 2 successes and
we did not achieve our goal.
So what do we need to do differently in
order to make it so that this actually
works the way the identity function is
supposed to work from a types perspective?
Okay, so let's sort of rewind the clock
and go back when we had not expanded those
extra database table
entries at this point.
And we're just kinda looking at, okay,
let's just take the identity function,
we're calling it passing 42.
How else can we do
the unification constraints so
that this ends up with a better outcome?
Okay, so first off, we resolve
that identity is id0, no problem,
that part's the same,
that part's the same.
So far, so good, everything is
totally harmless at this point.
The next thing we're gonna do is we're
going to make a fresh function type just
for this call.
So you may recall at the end
of the previous exercise,
one of the things we did,
which is a little bit of foreshadowing,
was that we made a fresh ID.
In the middle of unification,
we're just, hey,
let's just add some new
stuff to the database.
That's the thing we can do.
And one of the other things we can do is
not only can we add rows to the database,
but we can put constraints on those rows,
we can populate them with new stuff.
And that's exactly what
we're gonna do here.
So what we're gonna do is we're
just gonna make up a new function.
And this new function is basically
a carbon copy of the old function,
except that we're giving it fresh IDs for
everything that is unbound.
So it's still got the same shape,
it's still one argument, one return value.
And it's still got the same sort of
connection here, where it's the argument
and the return value are the same ID,
it's just that we've given it a new ID.
So rather than recycling the two,
we're just sort of,
we made a new one that looks and works
like the old one, but it's sort of a twin.
They're totally independent, they're
not connected, they're not symlinked.
They just look identical,
but they aren't identical.
And the really critical thing here is
that, now, if we start using this one in
all the places that we were
previously using this one.
Now, we can go ahead and
modify this one as much as we want, and
it's not gonna go back and
damage the original identity function.
It's not gonna go and turn this into
a number because now we're just messing
around with this copy that we
made rather than the original.
Now, this is a really
important subtle distinction,
because sometimes you wanna do this and
sometimes you don't wanna do this.
In the previous example, it was very
important that we went back and
affected the original,
whereas in this case, we don't.
So, what's the difference?
Well, the difference is,
a is a polymorphic type.
So previously, we were dealing with
a function that was taking a number type,
after we did type inference,
we concluded, that thing was a number.
Its type was hard-coded,
it was a concrete number type.
This thing, remember, never gets
bound to anything, it's unbound,
that's how we know it's a polymorphic
type, also known as a type variable.
So in our system here, when you have this
scenario where you have this thing and
there's nothing associated with it,
that is a type variable.
Which is why in the literature, [LAUGH]
they call these things type variables
because when you initialize them,
that's what they are.
So I like to call them IDs
cuz of the database metaphor.
But if you see someone talking about, this
is a type variable, that can usually mean
either the ID itself or just the sort of
default situation that it's in when you've
just made the number and you haven't
actually associated anything with it yet,
because it's, well, yeah, it's null,
it's unbound, it's just a type variable.
It could end up being anything,
it's polymorphic.
And when you are calling these things,
this is the scenario where you want to do
this sort of cloning trick to make sure
that you're not accidentally polluting
the original thing and it stays
polymorphic and remains a type variable.
As far as figuring out when to do that,
one way you could think of this,
this would be a very inefficient
way to implement it.
Is you could just say, well,
every time we do a function call,
we just clone it as much as we want.
But then if the arguments
are not polymorphic,
then we just throw away the call.
But of course, it kinda makes more
sense to just sort of be, okay, well,
let me look at what I'm
actually passing here.
Before I do this unification,
I can decide in the moment, on the fly,
okay, am I dealing with
a polymorphic variable?
If so, I need to do this cloning,
and otherwise, I don't.
Okay, so, I've chosen a different color
for these just to kind of emphasize
that both of these are sort of for
purposes of this call only.
The only reason we created these was
just for this one call to identity.
They're not gonna participate in any
of the rest of the stuff we're doing.
They're just narrowly scoped to,
we did this so
that we can type check this without
affecting the identity function here.
Okay, so now we unify(4, 7).
So 4 being the return type, and then
the 7 being the equivalent of this two,
except over here it's a 7 instead of a 2.
Then unify(5, 7), okay?
So far, so good.
And then unify(5, N).
So, exact same stuff that we did before,
except the arguments of return
type are now unifying with 6 and
7 rather than 2 and 3,
like they were in the previous example.
So, so far, so good,
we'll just go ahead and do those.
So 4 unifies with 7, 5 unifies with 7,
and then 5 unifies with Number,
which results in the symlink
causing 7 to end up being a Number.
This is fine because we
have this clone here and
this clone thinks it's all about numbers.
But that's not a big deal when we come to
the other one where we're passing it in
with a string because it's gonna get its
own clone, which we're gonna call 10 and
11 down here.
So 8 is gonna be the strategy thing, 0 is
the same as before, 9 is the argument.
And now when we go and unify these three
in exactly the same way that we did
the previous time, except that now we're
unifying with 11 rather than with 2.
Yeah, then we go through and just process
these things, symlink, symlink, and
this ends up being a string,
and it's no problem.
We have these two clones that got totally
unified and they didn't harm anything,
there was no effect on identity.
If we wanted to, we could call it a whole
bunch more times like an array and
pass in a function and a Boolean.
And all these different things, since
every single time we do them, they're
gonna get their own fresh clone of this
function that we're gonna unify against.
We're never gonna end up actually
stomping on the original,
we're only ever gonna be
interacting with these copies.
And so,
we can do all the full type inference,
we are still getting stuff out of this,
figuring out,
this thing is getting the same return
type because that's what this does.
So we do get to see, this ends up being
a Number, this ends up being a String,
and these things
are similar to one another.
That's all very nice and useful, right?
If we ask,
what's the type of this whole expression?
We can ask, 8 0, 8 is 11, 11 is string.
So it's serving a very useful purpose,
but it's not serving the purpose that we
don't want it to, namely,
modifying the original.
Because the original is polymorphic, and
we do not want to modify
that polymorphic function.